Hey they're welcome to another session of limitless calculus.
So we already know what derivatives are and we know how to find them.
Now what are some of the applications of derivatives.
That's what we'll be starting to look at today.
The first application that we're going to look at is increasing and decreasing intervals of functions.
Let's jump in to a quick graph and I'll show you what I mean.
So for example we have our plane over here.
So this is only the graph of one function but I'll use two collars so we can differentiate between increasing
and decreasing.
So let me show you what I mean.
Let's say we have this curve that looks something like this.
And then after that it starts like that and then it goes back up
then it goes down a little
and then finally it goes back up.
All right so check this out.
Let's say that we were going to read this function from left to right.
You'll notice that the graph is pink as you go from left to right.
It is going up.
Right.
Because for example if you're here and you go from left to right you'll notice that the pink part is
going up.
Then you get to this point.
And at this point the function becomes blue and then it starts going down
up to here.
But then here again it turns pink because it comes back up and then it turns blue it goes down by a
little and then it goes back up as pink.
So the main point here is where the function is pink the function is increasing.
Why is it increasing.
Because as you go from left to right it's going up.
So the y values are getting higher and higher.
That's true here.
That is also true here and the other pink part and that is also true here as well.
On the other hand when the function is blue then the function is decreasing.
All right so let's go to the blue parts.
See from here up to down here the function is going down as you go from left to right in the same way
from here to here.
The function is also going down as you go from left to right.
So the y values are getting lower and lower.
So pretty much you know like this is the y value of 0.
So are getting lower and lower and lower.
In fact over here they even go into the negatives.
So that's how small they keep getting.
All right.
So again pink is increasing because their y values are getting bigger and the blue ones are decreasing
because the y values are getting smaller.
So let's go into the definition for increasing and decreasing.
All right so here we have the definition of for increasing intervals.
By the way if you didn't know this an interval is simply a group of x values.
Ok so I'll put it right here the interval is just a group of x values.
Right.
So for example if I say the interval from 1 to 5 that means all the numbers between 1 and 5 and the
interval can either include the 1 and 5 or not include the 1 and 5.
OK.
So we have that an interval is increasing.
If the Y values are getting bigger.
So as the x values get bigger and bigger the y values get bigger and bigger as well.
In other words the graph goes up as you move from left to right.
And again let's draw this quickly.
Here's a function that's always going up.
So as you move from left to right and you trace your pencil through the graph the y values are always
going up.
See that.
So you're always always going up as you move from left to right.
That means that this graph is always increasing.
All right.
So this means for all egg's values in this graph it is always going up.
Now let's go to the counter-part which is decreasing intervals.
So just like we can have a graph that's increasing.
We can have a graph that's decreasing.
So an entry level is decreasing if the y values are getting smaller.
That means it's going down.
In other words the graph goes down as you move from left to right and let's draw this right here.
Here's an example of a graph that's always going down.
So if we actually trace our pencils and move from left to right you'll notice that the y values are
getting smaller because as you move from left to right the graph is going down.
Compare this with the other one that we looked at which is the increasing interval where the graph was
going up from left to right.
See how this one never goes up it just goes down.
So this is an example of a function that is always decreasing.
OK so we saw an example of a function that's always increasing and one that's always decreasing.
But you could have a function that actually has both increasing intervals and decreasing intervals.
So like I said you could also have both increasing and decreasing.
So in those cases you have a graph that goes up for some intervals.
In other words increases for some intervals and then it goes down for other animals.
In other words it decreases for others.
So let's just draw a quick example.
And it's going to be very similar to the one that we talked about at the beginning.
I'll draw the increasing in pink.
And then the decreasing part in blue
and then it increases again.
All right
so we can actually say the following.
Let's say that this is negative 3 for X and this is let's say five.
So to the left of negative 3 The graph is increasing.
Right.
And remember you always measure this from left to right.
So to the left of negative three you have to come this way and say OK the graph is actually going up.
So when X is less than negative three then it is increasing.
This will be your first interval.
Other numbers that are less than negative 3 are right.
And let's say between negative 3 and 5.
What is the graph doing.
It's actually decreasing.
See that it's going down between these two points.
So when x is greater than negative three and less than five then it is decreasing.
Finally what happens at five.
Well at five it actually starts to increase again.
So again we go from left to right and we see that it's actually going up.
So we finally say when x is greater than five it is increasing again
all right.
So in this example it's easier to know when it's decreasing and when it's increasing because we have
a graph what happens when we don't have a graph and we want to find the intervals where a function is
increasing and the intervals where a function is decreasing and or derivatives we're going to use derivatives
to find out when a function is increasing and decreasing.
And when we don't have a graph.
So if we're given a function and were asked to find where the function is increasing and where it is
decreasing then we can use derivatives.
So here are the rules
the derivative of f prime of x is positive.
So I'll put a plus
then the graph is increasing
on the other hand
if the derivative is negative is negative then guess what.
The graph is decreasing.
And finally if the derivative is neither positive or negative.
So in other words if it's equal to zero then it is neither.
All right.
It's not decreasing nor increasing.
That's it.
So let's review if the derivative of a function is positive for a certain interval then the function
is increasing on that interval.
On the other hand if the derivative of a function is negative over an interval then the function is
decreasing at that interval.
And then finally if the derivative is neither positive or negative is 0 then it is neither increasing
or decreasing.
Let's see why that is.
So again let's draw our graph.
So we'll do paying for increasing and then blue for decreasing and then paying once again.
So remember what derivatives measure it measures the rate of change and the rate of change is the slope
of a line tangent to the graph.
So when the function is increasing.
Let's pick a point on the increasing interval.
So for example this one.
And if we draw a line tangent to that.
This one here you'll notice that the line is going up as you go left to right.
That means the slope is positive.
In other words if the derivative is positive that means that the slope of the line touching the graph
at that specific point is also positive.
That is why when the derivative is positive that means the graph is increasing because the slope of
the line tangent is positive.
On the other hand let's pick a point on the decreasing interval.
So let's pick for example.
This point right on the decreasing interval if we draw a line tangent to that it's going to look like
this.
So what happens in this case.
Well the line turned into the graph is this and its slope is negative.
Why.
Because a rise over run is negative.
So for every unit you move to the right you have to go down in the positive one.
For every unit you move right you have to go up.
Right.
Right up right up right up on this green one it's right down right down right down.
So the slope of this line is negative therefore when the derivative is negative that means the function
is decreasing.
So positive derivative increasing negative derivative decreasing.
So that means there's a point somewhere where the graph goes from increasing to decreasing and then
another point where he goes from decreasing to increasing.
When does that happen.
It actually happens twice in this graph.
So first it happens here.
Notice that it was increasing and then it starts decreasing over here.
But it also happens here it goes from decreasing to increasing.
So what do we draw a line tangent to that point where the graph changes.
It's this line over here so remember that slope is right.
Overrun is this line rising at all.
Is it going up or is it going down.
Absolutely not.
It is basically a horizontal line.
So there is no slope.
That means that the slope is zero.
So m is zero.
So that's interesting because that tells you that when the derivative is equal to zero it is neither
increasing or decreasing.
It is simply a point where the graph can go from increasing to decreasing or in this specific case from
decreasing up to increasing.
All right.
So we need to find these points where the graph can change from increasing to decreasing or vice versa.
Then we have to test the value to the left of the point and to the right of the point that's when we
know for which intervals a function is increasing and decreasing.
Let's see how we can actually do this.
So to find
where the graph changes
from increasing to decreasing
or vice versa from decreasing to increasing we have to check for two cases first.
We need to find the values that make that top of the function equal to zero.
So in the first case we need to find the values that make the derivative equal to zero.
So we need to find values where
the derivative f prime of x is equal to zero.
Right.
So just like we saw in the last example there are points where the derivative is zero.
So we need to test for values to the left of that and to the right of that and see when it is increasing.
And when it is decreasing.
And if this isn't and if this makes absolutely no sense.
Don't worry we'll do a couple of examples and you'll see it in action.
All right so the first case we need to check is for values were the prime of x is equal to zero.
And we also need to check for values
where the derivative
prime of X is undefined.
And of course we know that something is undefined when there's division by zero.
So this only applies this second case only applies when you have the nominator to only
when you have
a bottom.
So if you have a fraction you have a top and you have a bottom and you only need to check for this when
you have a bottom part.
All right so now we know that we need to check for both values that make the derivative equal to zero.
And that make it undefined.
So let's put all of this together and let's find out how to find the intervals of increase and decrease
for a function with an example.